KEP-3063: dynamic resource allocation: match API with actual implementation in 1.26 (#3663)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation/README.md

### Resource allocation and usage flow

The following steps shows how resource allocation works for a resource that

> gets defined in template for the Pod. Several of these steps may fail without changing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gets defined in a ResourceClaimTemplate and referenced by a Pod. Several of these steps may fail without changing
```

//
// This is an alpha type and requires enabling the DynamicResourceAllocation
// feature gate.
type ResourceClass struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// DriverName defines the name of the dynamic resource driver that is
	// used for allocation of a ResourceClaim that uses this class.
	//
	// Resource drivers have a unique name in forward domain order
	// (acme.example.com).
	DriverName string

	// ParametersRef references an arbitrary separate object that may hold
	// parameters that will be used by the driver when allocating a
	// resource that uses this class. A dynamic resource driver can
	// distinguish between parameters stored here and and those stored in
	// ResourceClaimSpec.
	// +optional
	ParametersRef *ResourceClassParametersReference

	// Only nodes matching the selector will be considered by the scheduler
	// when trying to find a Node that fits a Pod when that Pod uses
	// a ResourceClaim that has not been allocated yet.
	//
	// Setting this field is optional. If null, all nodes are candidates.
	// +optional
	SuitableNodes *core.NodeSelector
}
```

A copy of the driver name is necessary to enable usage

> of the claim by kubelet in case that the ResourceClass got

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the claim by the kubelet in case where the ResourceClass gets
```

> of the claim by the kubelet in case where the ResourceClass gets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the claim by the kubelet in case the ResourceClass gets
```

removed in the meantime. It also helps the resource driver
to determine whether it needs to handle a claim that got
marked for deletion.

```
// ResourceClaim describes which resources are needed by a resource consumer.
// Its status tracks whether the resource has been allocated and what the
// resulting attributes are.
//
// This is an alpha type and requires enabling the DynamicResourceAllocation
// feature gate.
type ResourceClaim struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// Spec describes the desired attributes of a resource that then needs
	// to be allocated. It can only be set once when creating the
	// ResourceClaim.
	Spec ResourceClaimSpec

	// Status describes whether the resource is available and with which
	// attributes.
	// +optional
	Status ResourceClaimStatus
}
```

The driver must set a finalizer in a ResourceClaim before it attempts to allocate

> the resource. It removes the finalizer again when a) the allocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the resource. It removes the finalizer when a) the allocation
```

> attempt has definitely failed or b) when the allocated resource was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attempt has definitely failed or b) the allocated resource was
```

deallocated. This helps to ensure that resources are not leaked
during normal operation of the cluster.

It cannot prevent force-deleting a ResourceClaim by clearing its
finalizers (something that users should never do without being aware

> of the consequences) or help when the entire cluster gets deleted.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "or help" here? Do you mean it also can't prevent the Claims from being deleted with then entire cluster gets deleted? Is that necessary to mention?

Author: It's one of two situations that a resource driver author has to consider where they cannot rely on Kubernetes to trigger the resource deallocation. I think it is worth mentioning because it might get overlooked, but I don't feel strongly about this.

Reviewer: I don't feel very strongly either, I think it's fine.

	// the time when allocation started.
	// +optional
	DriverName string

	// Allocation is set by the resource driver once a resource has been
	// allocated successfully. If this is not specified, the resource is
	// not yet allocated.
	// +optional
	Allocation *AllocationResult

	// ReservedFor indicates which entities are currently allowed to use
	// the claim. A Pod which references a ResourceClaim which is not
	// reserved for that Pod will not be started.
	//
	// There can be at most 32 such reservations. This may get increased in
	// the future, but not reduced.
	// +optional
	ReservedFor []ResourceClaimConsumerReference

	// DeallocationRequested indicates that a ResourceClaim is to be
	// deallocated.
	//
	// The driver then must deallocate this claim and reset the field
	// together with clearing the Allocation field.
	//
	// While DeallocationRequested is set, no new consumers may be added to
	// ReservedFor.
	// +optional
	DeallocationRequested bool
}

// ReservedForMaxSize is the maximum number of entries in
// claim.status.reservedFor.
const ResourceClaimReservedForMaxSize = 32
```

DeallocationRequested gets set by the scheduler when it detects

> the situation where pod scheduling cannot proceed because some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that pod scheduling cannot proceed because some
```

> claim was allocated for a node that cannot provide some other

Reviewer: What do you mean by "some other resource". Should this be: "... cannot provide the resource it refers to".

Author: "that" refers to the node.

".. for a node for which some other pending claims cannot be allocated
because that node ran out of resources for those." ?

Reviewer: yeah, that is clearer.

	number of users.

	Any solution that handles reservations differently will have to
	be very careful about race conditions.
	<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
}

// ResourceHandleMaxSize is the maximum size of allocation.resourceHandle.
const ResourceHandleMaxSize = 16 * 1024
```

Resource drivers can use the `ResourceHandle` to store some data directly or
cross-reference some other place where information is stored.
This data is guaranteed to be available when a Pod is about
to run on a node, in contrast to the ResourceClass which
may have been deleted in the meantime. It's also protected from
modification by a user, in contrast to an annotation.

```
// PodScheduling objects hold information that is needed to schedule
// a Pod with ResourceClaims that use "WaitForFirstConsumer" allocation
// mode.
//
// This is an alpha type and requires enabling the DynamicResourceAllocation
// feature gate.
type PodScheduling struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata
	// +optional
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	// Spec describes where resources for the Pod are needed.
	Spec PodSchedulingSpec

	// Status describes where resources for the Pod can be allocated.
	Status PodSchedulingStatus
}
```

> PodScheduling objects get created by a scheduler when it handles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PodScheduling objects get created by a scheduler when it processes
```

a pod which uses one or more unallocated ResourceClaims with delayed
allocation.

The name of a PodScheduling object must be the same as the corresponding Pod.
That Pod must be listed as owner in OwnerReferences
to ensure that the PodScheduling object gets deleted
when no longer needed. Normally the scheduler will delete it.

Drivers must ignore PodScheduling objects where the owning
pod already got deleted because such objects are orphaned
and will be removed soon.

```
// PodSchedulingSpec describes where resources for the Pod are needed.
type PodSchedulingSpec struct {
	// SelectedNode is the node for which allocation of ResourceClaims that
	// are referenced by the Pod and that use "WaitForFirstConsumer"
	// allocation is to be attempted.
	SelectedNode string

	// PotentialNodes lists nodes where the Pod might be able to run.
	//
	// The size of this field is limited to 128. This is large enough for
	// many clusters. Larger clusters may need more attempts to find a node
	// that suits all pending resources. This may get increased in the
	// future, but not reduced.
	// +optional
	PotentialNodes []string
}
```

When allocation is delayed, the scheduler must set

> the node for which it wants the resource(s) to be allocated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `SelectedNode` for which it wants the resource(s) to be allocated
```

The driver must ensure that the allocated resource
is available on this node or update ResourceSchedulingStatus.UnsuitableNodes
to indicate where allocation might succeed.

When allocation succeeds, drivers should immediately add
the pod to the ResourceClaimStatus.ReservedFor field
together with setting ResourceClaimStatus.Allocated. This
optimization may save scheduling attempts and roundtrips
through the API server because the scheduler does not
need to reserve the claim for the pod itself.

The selected node may change over time, for example
when the initial choice turns out to be unsuitable
after all. Drivers must not reallocate for a different
node when they see such a change because it would
lead to race conditions. Instead, the scheduler
will trigger deallocation of specific claims as
needed through the ResourceClaimStatus.DeallocationRequested
field.

When allocation is delayed, and the scheduler needs to
decide on which node a Pod should run, it will
ask the driver(s) on which nodes the resource might be
made available. To trigger that check, the scheduler
provides the names of nodes which might be suitable
for the Pod. Will be updated periodically until

> all resources are allocated.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph would flow better if added as part of the paragraph above that reads:

> When allocation is delayed, the scheduler must set
> the `SelectedNode` for which it wants the resource(s) to be allocated
> before the driver(s) start with allocation.

As part of that, I'd drop the redundant "When allocation is delayed" and just start with:
> The scheduler also needs to decide on which node a Pod should run and will ...

Otherwise you start talking about UnsuitableNodes before introducing how the driver is given the opportunity to set this field.

Author: Makes sense, changed.

The ResourceClass.SuiteableNodes node selector can be
used to filter out nodes based on labels. This prevents
adding nodes here that the driver then would need to
reject through UnsuitableNodes.

```
// PodSchedulingStatus describes where resources for the Pod can be allocated.
type PodSchedulingStatus struct {
	// ResourceClaims describes resource availability for each
	// pod.spec.resourceClaim entry where the corresponding ResourceClaim
	// uses "WaitForFirstConsumer" allocation mode.
	// +optional
	ResourceClaims []ResourceClaimSchedulingStatus

	// If there ever is a need to support other kinds of resources
	// than ResourceClaim, then new fields could get added here
	// for those other resources.
}
```

Each resource driver is responsible for providing information about
those resources in the Pod that the driver manages. It can skip

> adding that information when it already allocated the resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adding this information once it has allocated the resource.
```

because the scheduler may decide to wait with selecting
a node until it has information from all drivers.

```
// ResourceClaimSchedulingStatus contains information about one particular
// ResourceClaim with "WaitForFirstConsumer" allocation mode.
type ResourceClaimSchedulingStatus struct {
	// Name matches the pod.spec.resourceClaims[*].Name field.
	Name string

	// UnsuitableNodes lists nodes that the ResourceClaim cannot be
	// allocated for.
	//
	// The size of this field is limited to 128, the same as for
	// PodSchedulingSpec.PotentialNodes. This may get increased in the
	// future, but not reduced.
	// +optional
	UnsuitableNodes []string
}

// PodSchedulingNodeListMaxSize defines the maximum number of entries in the
// node lists that are stored in PodScheduling objects. This limit is part
// of the API.
const PodSchedulingNodeListMaxSize = 256
```

UnsuitableNodes lists nodes that the claim cannot be allocated for.
Nodes listed here will be ignored by the scheduler when selecting a
node for a Pod. All other nodes are potential candidates, either
because no information is available yet or because allocation might
succeed.

> A change of the PodSchedulingSpec.PotentialNodes field and/or a failed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A change to the PodSchedulingSpec.PotentialNodes field and/or a failed
```

> allocation attempt trigger an update of this field: the driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allocation attempt triggers an update of this field: the driver
```

then checks all nodes listed in PotentialNodes and UnsuitableNodes
and updates UnsuitableNodes.

It must include the prior UnsuitableNodes in this check because the
scheduler will not list those again in PotentialNodes but they might
still be unsuitable.

> This can change, so the driver also must refresh this information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can change, so the driver must also refresh this information
```
